## Introduction

In my previous video, I showed you how to connect to a Postgres database in Go using `sqlx` and `pq`.
We also created a database table to store user data.
Today, I would like to build on that foundation to implement password authentication using Argon2.
If you have watched my previous video, you can pick up where we left off, but if you haven't, it's also fine.
There is the Github repo in the description below and you can use it as a starting point.

## How password hashing works

First, we need to understand how password hashing algorithms work.
This is Bob. Bob wants to create an account on our website with videos about programming. He inputs his email address and a password.
We need to transform his password in such a way that we can, at any time, check if the password is correct.
However, we also need to make sure that the bad guys won't be able to easily guess what his password is, just by looking at the encrypted form.
This is why password hashing algorithms were invented.
We take Bob's password, mix it together with a random value called "salt," and apply some sort of complex and slow computations, ending up with a string that looks like this.
This string contains an identifier of the hashing algorithm, its parameters, the salting value, and the result of all those computations.
Whenever Bob wants to sign in, we take his password, add the salt and apply the same computations.
If we end up with the same value, it means that the password is correct and that we can let Bob into the system.

## Installing Argon2id library for Go

In this video, we're going to be using a password hashing library called "argon2id".
Let's start by installing this library.
If you have trouble finding it, there is a link in the description below.
Open a terminal and cd into the directory for the "goma" project that we started in the previous video.
On the website of the package, click on the clipboard icon to copy the import path to the system clipboard.
Then, in the terminal, type `go get `, then paste the import path and press Enter.

## Argon2id presentation and demonstration

Using `mkdir -p`, create a directory at `exp/argon`, and inside that directory, create a file named `main.go` and open it in a code editor.
The `exp` stands for "experimental", because we are going to write a smaller program before integrating the password hashing algorithm into the bigger system.
In this file, define `package main` and `func main()`.
Inside `main`, we define a `password` variable, then create a new password hash based on the plain text password and default hashing parameters.
If any error occurred during the hashing process, we log the error and exit, otherwise we print the hashed password.
Next, we try out a few passwords to see if they match.
For each password, we run the check and if it raises any errors, we log the error to the standard output and exit.
Otherwise, we print the tested password and the result of the check.
When we run this program, we should see a password hash string printed to the terminal.
Below that, we see all the passwords that we tested. As we can see, only the original password matches the test.
If you run the program several times, you may notice that the password digest is different every time.
This is because of the random salting value.
The algorithm is designed in this way, so that in case of a database breach, breaking one password hash would not compromise other accounts.

## What we are going to build

First, let me quickly explain the project structure we are going to implement.
If you have ever worked with Web frameworks, you may be familiar with the MVC design pattern.
MVC stands for "Model-View-Controller," and it means that the application workflow is roughly divided into three parts.
A controller is responsible for processing incoming HTTP requests and returning responses to the client.
A model usually interacts with the database and validates data.
The view layer is responsible for rendering the data as HTML or JSON.
In reality, though, there are many situations when you need to implement complex logic that doesn't seem to fit in either the model or the controller.
Therefore, some frameworks have come up with another layer, which sits in between the controller and the model.
In Phoenix, which is a Web framework for Elixir, these are called "contexts."
In Rails, you can use a pattern called "services."
In this video, we are not working with a framework, so there is no one true project structure. We will be writing a "store," containing the logic responsible for simple database interactions. On top of the store, we will implement a "service," which will handle the more complex logic, such as the password authentication workflow we are going to implement today.
The controllers and views are out of the scope of this video.

## Setting up types

Let's start by defining a user type.
Back in the root directory of the project, create a directory called `types`.
Inside this directory, create a file named `user.go` and open it in a code editor.
Start by defining the package name, then define a `User` struct.
We need to map every column in the database table to a field on the struct.
For the `id` column, we define a struct field called "ID", with two capital letters.
Every column in the struct must start with a capital letter, otherwise `sqlx` won't be able to map the columns to their respective struct fields.
Since the struct field name is different from the column name in the database, we need to add an annotation after the field type to tell `sqlx` to match this field to the `id` column.
Then we do a similar thing for `email`.
For the `password_hash` column, we need to define the struct field as a string pointer.
This is because the corresponding database column does not have a `not null` constraint.
With a pointer type, `sqlx` can map null values to null pointers.
If we used a regular value type, trying to scan a null value would result in a runtime error.
For the remaining two columns, we use `time.Time`. This is the default data type for dates and times in the Go standard library.

## Implement UserStore, InsertUser()

Now that we have the `User` struct defined, let's build a "store".
In this setup, the "store" module should define operations interacting directly with the persistence layer, such as inserting, reading, or deleting data.
For the more advanced use cases, such as data validation or password hashing, we will later define another module called a "service".
In the root directory of the project, create a directory called `store`.
Inside this directory, create a file named `user_store.go` and open it in a code editor.
Start by defining the package name, then define a struct called `UserStore`.
This struct will only have one field called DB, where we can store a pointer to a `sqlx` database connection.
By keeping our own database connection within the store struct, we can write unit tests connecting to a dedicated testing database.
Define a function called `NewUserStore` that accepts a database connection and returns a `UserStore` struct.
Within the function body, return a `UserStore` struct with the same database connection.
Since the `db` field on the struct is private, only functions within the same package can set this field, and that's why we need to define a constructor function.
Define an method called `InsertUser` on the `UserStore` type.
This method accepts a pointer to a User struct and returns a pointer to a User struct and an error.
In this method, first define a variable to store the result of a SQL query.
Then, using the `Get` method on the database connection, run this insert query and scan the returned data into the `result` variable.
In the case of the `users` table, the only two columns that we need to provide are `email` and `password_hash`, and for everything else we can rely on the values generated by the database.
Therefore, we define two placeholders in the SQL syntax, and we pass the values of email and password hash as parameters.
Since we added a `returning *` clause to the query, the database will return all columns of the newly inserted record.
If any error occurred, we return `nil` and a wrapped error message. Otherwise, we return a pointer to the `result` variable and a `nil` error.

## Test database setup

At this point, we have a function that looks like it should work correctly, but we have no user interface to check if it works.
Let's write some unit tests instead.
Some people will likely argue that a unit test should never touch a real database, and that a test talking to a database is really an integration test, but honestly, I don't care.
First, we're going to need a database, and we will have to run migrations on that database.
As this is a task we will have to perform many times in the future, it makes sense to write it as a `make` target, so we can have it automated.
Since I am working on Debian, the `make` on my system will be GNU make.
If you are on macOS or on a BSD system, the default make on your system may be BSD make, in which case you may have to install GNU make separately and run all `make` commands as `gmake`.

## Writing a Makefile

In the root directory of the project, create a file named `Makefile`, with the first letter capitalized, and open it in a text editor.
Now, we are going to define a "target" called `db.test.prepare`.
First, type the name of the target, followed by a colon.
The following lines will contain instructions and must be indented with one tab.
Create the test database, and ignore any errors.
This is the most concise way of creating a database only if it doesn't exist.
Then, run migrations using `goose up`, passing the `TEST_DATABASE_URL` variable to `goose` as the connection string.
The at sign at (@) the beginning of the line instructs make not to print the command before it is executed.

## Add guard target to Makefile

Now, in this target we are referencing two environment variables, one for the database name and another one for the connection string.
We need to make sure that both variables are set before we do anything.
To this end, we can implement a guard.
Add a target called `guard-%`, and inside, add this scary looking command. Now, what `test -n` does is simply check if its argument is a non-empty string, and if this command fails, we print a nice error message with `echo` and exit with a non-zero exit code.
Now, add these two guards as dependencies of the `db.test.prepare` target.
If you try to run `make db.test.prepare` now, you will get an error message, because neither of these environment variables is defined.
Let's add these two environment variables to our `.envrc` file.
Set `TEST_DATABASE_NAME` to `goma_test`, then set `TEST_DATABASE_URL` to a connection string for this database.
Do note that the expression on the screen uses variable interpolation rather than a hardcoded name.
If you have configured `direnv` correctly, when you save this file and open a new shell, you should see an error message asking you to run `direnv allow`.
If you don't use `direnv`, you can set the correct environment variables by sourcing this file.
When you run `make db.test.prepare` now, it should correctly create a database and run migrations.
You can verify this by connecting to the database and seeing its schema.

## Install `testify`

In the tests, we are going to use a library called `testify` to improve our testing experience.
On the website of `testify` package in the Go package registry, copy the import path of `testify` into the system clipboard.
In the root directory of the project, install the package using `go get`, pasting the import path.

## Set up `StoreTestSuite`

Now, inside the `store` directory, create a file called `store_test.go`, and open it in a text editor.
First, define the package name. Since this is a test file and the directory name is `store`, the package must be named `store_test`.
In this package, just like in `main.go`, we're going to have to import `pq`, prefixed with an underscore.
This is necessary in order to connect to a Postgres database using `sqlx`.
Then, we are going to define a test suite. This is a feature of the `testify` package.
First, define a struct type called `StoreTestSuite`, embedding the `suite.Suite` type from the `testify` library, and then add an unexported field called `db`, which we're going to use to store a connection to the test database.
We can share this setup for all tests inside this package.
Then, define a method called `SetupTest` on this type.
Inside, fetch the connection string for the test database from the environment.
Connect to the database using `MustConnect`, and store a pointer to the connection in the `db` field.
Finally, execute this query to empty the `users` table, so we can start each test run with an empty database.
In order for the Go test runner to execute this test suite, we need to define a regular Go test example.
Inside this function, we run `suite.Run` with the `t` parameter provided by the test runner and a newly initialized `StoreTestSuite` struct.

## Add examples for `UserStore`

Next, let's define some test examples for the `UserStore`.
Inside the `store` directory, create a file named `user_store_test.go` and open it in a code editor.
Start by declaring the package name, which is `store_test`.
Then, define a test example as a method called `TestInsertUser` on the `StoreTestSuite` type.
In this example, we are going to test if the store can persist a user in the database when called with valid parameters.
First, we need to declare the password hash as a separate variable.
This is because the `PasswordHash` field on the user struct is a pointer type, and we can only obtain a pointer to a string if it is stored in a variable.
Then, we can instantiate a User struct with an example email and a reference to the `passwordHash` variable.
Then, construct a user store with a test database connection.
Finally, we can call `InsertUser` with a reference to the user struct.
Then, ensure no error was returned, and assert that the ID field of the result is greater than 0.
Since the ID column is generated by the database, checking if the field is non-zero is a good way to ensure that the value has been correctly saved.
Then, we can check that the email address and the password hash have the same values as the ones we passed to `InsertUser`.

## Running tests

We can run the tests for the whole project using the command `go test -v ./...`.
However, we can save ourselves some typing by defining a `make` target to run the tests for us.
In the `Makefile`, define a target called `test` with a dependency on `db.test.prepare`.
Then, add the command to run tests.
Now, when we run `make test`, the command should prepare the test database and run all tests.
We see that all examples should be passing.

## Testing user count

Now, let's improve our tests by testing the user count. When we insert a user into the database, the user count should change by one, so we can query the user count before and after the call to `InsertUser`.
In the `user_store_test.go` file, define a function called `countUsers` that takes a database connection and returns an integer and an error.
Inside, define an integer variable to store the result of the count query.
Then, run this SQL query to count all records in the `users` table and scan the returned value into the `result` variable.
Finally, return the result and the error returned by `Scan`.
In the test example, call this function to count users before the call to `InsertUser`, and ensure that no error was returned.
Then, do the same after the call. Finally, add an assertion to check that the count of users after the call to `InsertUser` is equal to the initial count plus one.
Do note that in the call to `Equal`, the first argument is the expected value and the second one is the actual value.
If we run `make test` now, all the examples should still be passing.

## Implementing `GetUserByEmail`

Before we can implement the actual user authentication, we're going to need a way to retrieve a user from the database by their email address.
Open the `user_store.go` file. Let's begin by defining a method called `GetUserByEmail` on the `UserStore` struct that takes an email address and returns a pointer to a `User` struct and an error.
Inside this method, define a variable to store the result of a SQL query.
Then, query the database and scan the returned value into the `result` variable. The SQL syntax contains a placeholder for the email address, so we need to pass the email address as a parameter to the `Get` method.
If the operation returned an error, we return `nil` and wrap the error. Otherwise, we return a reference to the `result` variable and a `nil` error.

## Testing `GetUserByEmail`

Now, let's test if `GetUserByEmail` works correctly. In the `user_store_test.go` file, add a test example called `TestGetUserByEmail`.
First, we insert a user into the database. We define the parameters for a new user, insert them into the database, and check that no error was returned.
Start by testing the happy path. Define a slice of strings with email addresses that we want to test. All of these are variants of the same email address, just with different capitalization. Since the `email` column in the `users` table is case-insensitive, querying for all of these should return the same user record.
For each address in the slice, we query the database with `GetUserByEmail`, check that there was no error, and finally, we assert that the returned `User` has the same `ID` as the record we are looking for.
Then, we query the database with another email address. The query will return an error, so we can check if the returned error wraps `ErrNoRows`, which is what the database should return if nothing was returned from a query.
Finally, assert that the returned user record is a `nil` pointer.
Now, if we run `make test`, all the tests should still be passing.

## Implementing `CheckPassword`

Now we can implement a method on the `User` struct to check password attempts. Open the file `user.go` in the `types` directory in a code editor.
Let's start by thinking about all the things that can go wrong. The first thing that can happen is that the user record does not have a `PasswordHash` or that the column is invalid.
You may think that it does not make too much sense to create users without passwords, but there are some cases when these can be useful.
For instance, sometimes you want to only allow a user to access your system with an API key, or for automated workflows like background jobs running on a fixed schedule.
Another error that we can think of is when the password entered by the user is incorrect.
For both of these cases, let's define error types using the function `errors.New`.
Then, define a method called `CheckPassword` on the `User` struct, taking a password as a string and returning a boolean and an error.
Start with the happy path: if everything is correct, return `true` and a nil error.
If the `PasswordHash` field is `nil` or does not begin with the prefix for Argon2id, return `false` and the `ErrNoPasswordSet` error.
Then we can run the proper password check.
If the check returns an error, return `false` and wrap the error.
If the password is incorrect, return false and the `ErrInvalidPassword` error.

## Building `UserService`

Now, let's implement a "user service". In this setup, a service acts as a link between a store and a request handler.
Create a directory called `service` in the root directory of the project.
Within this directory, create a file named `user_service.go` and open it in a code editor.
Start by defining the package name.
Then, define a struct called `UserService` with a private field called `store`, which will hold a `UserStore`.
Define a function called `NewUserService`, taking a pointer to a database connection and returning a `UserService` struct.
In this function, return a `UserService` struct with a `UserStore`, initialized with the given database connection.
This will be our constructor that we will use to initialize `UserService` structs.
Then, define a method called `AuthenticateUserByEmailPassword` that takes an email and a password and returns a pointer to a `User` struct and an error.
First, fetch a user by their email address. If this operation returned an error, return `nil` and the error.
Then, check the password by calling the `CheckPassword` method we have just implemented. If the password check returned an error, return `nil` and the error.
Finally, if this check has passed, it means that the user exists and that the password is correct.
We can return the user and no error.

## Testing `UserService`

Now, let us write some tests for the user service.
We're going to have to create a file named `service_test.go` in the `service` directory.
This file will be almost exactly the same as the one for the store package, so I'm not going to bother writing it out by hand.
Instead, I am going to use a command line tool called `sed`. This command will read the file `store_test.go`, replace every occurrence of "Store" with "Service," and print the result to the standard output. Now, I pipe it to a command called `tee`, which will also write the text to the file I passed as its argument.
As we can see, this gave us a new struct type for a test suite and a Go test example.
Now, create a file called `user_service_test.go` in the `service` directory and open it in a code editor.
Define a test example called `TestAuthenticateUserByEmailPassword` on the `ServiceTestSuite` struct.
Start by inserting test data into the database.
First, define a password variable and hash it using `argon2id`, using the default parameters.
Assert that the `CreateHash` function did not return an error.
Then, define a `User` struct with a unique email address and the password hash we have just generated.
Initialize a `UserStore` and insert the `User` struct into the database, then ensure that no error was returned.
Now, we can test the actual function, starting with the happy path.
Initialize a `UserService` with a database connection, then call `AuthenticateUserByEmailPassword` with the correct email and password.
Ensure that no error was returned, and assert that the `User` struct returned by the method call has the same ID as the `User` we have created.
Then, if we pass the correct email and an invalid password, we should get a `nil` user and an `ErrInvalidPassword`.
If we pass a non-existent email address and the original user's password, we should get a `nil` and an `ErrNoRows`.
Finally, run this SQL code to update the password hash of this user to an invalid value.
If we try to authenticate with the correct email and password, we should get a `nil` user and an `ErrNoPasswordSet` error.
If you run `make test` now, all tests should be passing.

## Conclusion

This is the end of part two.
It's been a long video, so congratulations if you made it this far.
We have managed to implement a few functions related to database operations and password hashing.
In the next video, we can take this knowledge further and implement user registration and login views.
If you enjoyed this video, kindly give me a thumbs up.
It really helps with the YouTube algorithm. If you are feeling very generous, please consider subscribing to my channel, so I can become rich and famous.
I hope you learned something, and see you in the next one.
